03-09-2025

             DIAGNOSTIC AND MONITORING                                        Semester-V: Biomedical Engineering

MODULE-4:BLOOD FLOW METER AND CARDIAC OUTPUT

                                                   Ref.: Handbook of Biomedical Instrumentation-R.S. Khandpur

  BLOOD FLOW METERS
  Blood flow is one of the most important physiological parameters and also one of
  the most difficult to measure accurately.
  This is because instruments for measuring the flow through blood vessels within the
  body have to meet certain stringent specifications; e.g. sensitivity and stability
  requirements depend upon the magnitude of flow, location and the diameter of the
  individual vessels.

                                                                                                                                              1

                                                                                                                                        03-09-2025

                                                     Ref.: Handbook of Biomedical Instrumentation-R.S. Khandpur

BLOOD FLOW METERS
There are many widely used techniques for measuring the blood flow and velocity.
They are categorized into invasive (surgical) and non-invasive (through the skin).
The most accurate method, obviously, is to simply sever the vessel and time the blood
flow into a calibrated beaker.
 But this procedure is too radical for most protocols.

                                                     Ref.: Handbook of Biomedical Instrumentation-R.S. Khandpur

ELECTROMAGNETIC BLOOD FLOW METERS
With this type of instrument, blood flow can be measured in intact blood vessels
without cannulation and under conditions which would otherwise be impossible.
However, this method requires that the blood vessel be exposed so that the flow
head or the measuring probe can be put across it.
     Faraday’s law of electromagnetic induction which states that when a
  conductor is moved at right angles through a magnetic field in a direction
  at right angles both to the magnetic field and its length, an emf is induced
                                in the conductor

                                                                                                                                                2

                                                                                                                                          03-09-2025

                                                       Ref.: Handbook of Biomedical Instrumentation-R.S. Khandpur

           ELECTROMAGNETIC BLOOD FLOW METERS
The blood stream, which is a conductor, cuts the magnetic field and voltage is induced in the
blood stream.
This induced voltage is picked up by two electrodes incorporated in the magnetic assembly.
The magnitude of the voltage picked up is directly proportional to the strength of the
magnetic field, the diameter of the blood vessel and the velocity of blood flow.
 e = CHVd
 where e = induced voltage
 H = strength of the magnetic field
 V = velocity of blood flow
 d = diameter of the blood vessel
 C = constant of proportionality

                                                       Ref.: Handbook of Biomedical Instrumentation-R.S. Khandpur

ELECTROMAGNETIC BLOOD FLOW METERS
 e = CHVd
 If the strength of the magnetic field and the diameter of the blood vessel remain unchanged,
 then the induced voltage will be a linear function of the blood flow velocity.
 Therefore, 𝑒 = 𝐶 𝑉
 Where 𝐶 is a constant and equal to CHd.
The induced voltage picked up by the electrodes is amplified and displayed/recorded on a
suitable system.
The system is calibrated in terms of volume flow as a function of the induced voltage.
The diameter of the blood vessel is held constant by the circumference of the hole in the
probe that surrounds it.

                                                                                                                                                  3

                                                                                                                                   03-09-2025

ELECTROMAGNETIC BLOOD FLOW METERS
The average flow velocity appears to be 20 to 25 cm/s in
 arteries and 10 to 12 cm/s in veins.
For designing the probe, velocity for the cardiovascular
system is taken as 15 cm/s.

TYPES OF ELECTROMAGNETIC BLOOD FLOW
METERS
 Sine Wave Flowmeters
In a sine wave flowmeter, the probe magnet is energized with a sine wave and
consequently the induced voltage will also be sinusoidal in nature.
The major problem encountered with the sinusoidal type of magnetic field is that the
blood vessel and the fluid contained in it act as the secondary coil of a transformer
when the probe magnet is excited.
As a result, in addition to the induced flow voltage, there is an induced artefact
voltage generally referred to as ‘transformer voltage’.

                                                                                                                                           4

                                                                                                                                       03-09-2025

                                                   Ref.: Handbook of Biomedical Instrumentation-R.S. Khandpur

TYPES OF ELECTROMAGNETIC BLOOD FLOW
METERS
 Sine Wave Flowmeters
The ‘transformer voltage’ is much larger than the signal or flow induced voltage and
is 90° out of phase with it.
In earlier versions of sine wave flowmeters, this unwanted voltage was eliminated by
injecting into the signal a voltage of equal strength, but having an opposite phase.
 Gated sine wave flowmeter: permit the amplification of the signals only during the
 portion of the cycle where flow induced voltages are maximum and the transformer
 induced voltages are minimum
 Square Wave Flowmeters

                                                   Ref.: Handbook of Biomedical Instrumentation-R.S. Khandpur

ULTRASONIC BLOOD FLOW METERS
 Doppler-shift Flow-Velocity Meters
It is a non-invasive technique to measure blood velocity in a particular vessel from
the surface of the body.
It is based on the analysis of echo signals from the erythrocytes in the vascular
structures.
Because of the Doppler effect, the frequency of these echo signals changes relative
to the frequency which the probe transmits.
 The Doppler frequency shift is a measure of the size and direction of the flow
 velocity.

                                                                                                                                               5

                                                                                                                                        03-09-2025

                                                    Ref.: Handbook of Biomedical Instrumentation-R.S. Khandpur

ULTRASONIC BLOOD FLOW METERS
The incident ultrasound is scattered by the blood cells and the scattered wave is
received by the second transducer.
The frequency shift due to the moving scatterers is proportional to the velocity of the
scatterers.
Alteration in frequency occurs first as the ultrasound arrives at the ‘scatterer’ and
second as it leaves the scatterer.

                                                    Ref.: Handbook of Biomedical Instrumentation-R.S. Khandpur

ULTRASONIC BLOOD FLOW METERS

 where f = change in frequency
 C = velocity of sound in blood
 q = angle of inclination of the incident wave to the direction of blood flow
 v = velocity of blood cells

                                                                                                                                                6

                                                                                                                                           03-09-2025

CARDIAC OUTPUT MEASUREMENT
 Cardiac Output is a term used in cardiac physiology that describes the volume of
  blood being pumped by the heart, in particular by the left or right ventricle, per
                                     unit time
 Cardiac output is the product of the heart rate (HR), or the number of heart beats
 per minute (bpm), and the stroke volume (SV), which is the volume of blood pumped
 from the ventricle per beat;
                                     CO = HR × SV
 Values for cardiac output are usually denoted as L/min. For a healthy person
 weighing 70 kg, the cardiac output at rest averages about 5 L/min; assuming a heart
 rate of 70 beats/min, the stroke volume would be approximately 70 mL.

CARDIAC OUTPUT MEASUREMENT

                        Major factors influencing cardiac output

                                                                                                                                                   7

                                                                                                                        03-09-2025

CARDIAC OUTPUT MEASUREMENT
Methods for CO Measurement
1. Doppler ultrasound
2. Pulse pressure methods
3. Impedance cardiography
4. Ultrasound dilution
5. Electrical cardiometry
6. Magnetic resonance imaging
7. Dye dilution method

CARDIAC OUTPUT MEASUREMENT
In 1897 Stewart injected a bolus of a sodium chloride solution
into the central venous circulation of anesthetized dogs and rabbits,
and then collected blood samples containing diluted sodium
chloride from a femoral artery catheter.
An electric transducer on the contralateral femoral artery sensed
the arrival of diluted injectate.

                                                                                                                                8

                                                                                                                                      03-09-2025

INDICATOR DILUTION METHOD
 A cardiac output measurement by indicator dilution has three principal
 phases:
 (a) an indicator is brought into the circulation (injection)
 (b) the indicator mixes with the bloodstream (mixing and dilution)
 (c) the concentration of the indicator is determined downstream (detection)

                                                  Ref.: Handbook of Biomedical Instrumentation-R.S. Khandpur

INDICATOR DILUTION METHOD
Indicator dilution principle states that if we introduce into or remove from a stream
of fluid a known amount of indicator and measure the concentration difference
upstream and downstream of the injection (or withdrawal) site, we can estimate the
volume flow of the fluid.
The method employs several different types of indicators.
Two methods are generally employed for introducing the indicator in the blood
stream, viz: it may be injected at a constant rate or as a bolus.
The method of continuous infusion suffers from the disadvantage that most indicators
recirculate, and this prevents a maxima from being achieved

                                                                                                                                              9

                                                                                                                                          03-09-2025

INDICATOR DILUTION METHOD
In the bolus injection method, a small but known quantity of an indicator such as a
dye or radioisotope is administered into the circulation.
It is injected into large vein or preferably into the right heart itself.
After passing through the right heart, lungs and the left heart, the indicator appears
in the arterial circulation.
The presence of an indicator in the peripheral artery is detected by a suitable
(photoelectric) transducer and is displayed on a chart recorder.

INDICATOR DILUTION METHOD
This way we get the cardiac output curve shown in Fig. This is also called the dilution
curve.

                                                                                                                                                 10

                                                                                                                                           03-09-2025

INDICATOR DILUTION METHOD
During the first circulation period, the indicator would mix up with the blood and will dilute
just a bit. When passing before the transducer, it would reveal a big and rapid change of
concentration. This is shown by the rising portion of the dilution curve.
Had the circulation system been an open one, the maximum concentration would have been
followed by an exponentially decreasing portion so as to cut the time axis as shown by the
dotted line.
The circulation system being a closed one, a fraction of the injected indicator would once
again pass through the heart and enter the arterial circulation.
A second peak would then appear. When the indicator is completely mixed up with blood,
the curve becomes parallel with the time axis.
The amplitude of this portion depends upon the quantity of the injected indicator and on the
total quantity of the circulating blood.

INDICATOR DILUTION METHOD
 For calculating the cardiac output from the dilution curve, assume that
 M = quantity of the injected indicator in mg
 Q = cardiac output

                                              Suppose that 10 mg of the indicator was injected and the
                                              average concentration as calculated from the curve was 5
                                              mg/l for a curve duration of 20 s

                                                                                                                                                  11

                                                                                                                                    03-09-2025

                                                            Ref.: Medical Instrumentation-John G. Webster

DYE DILUTION METHOD
A common method of clinically measuring cardiac output is to use a colored dye,
indocyanine green (cardiogreen).
 Inert
 Harmless
 Measurable
 Economical
 Always intravascular

Optical characteristics of cardiogreen is 805 nm. At this wavelength the
measurements are independent of oxygenation status.
50% of dye is excreted by the kidneys in the first 10 min, so repeat determinations
are possible.

DYE DILUTION METHOD
The plot of the curve for concentration versus time is obtained from a constant flow
pump, which draws blood from a catheter placed in the femoral or brachial artery.
Blood is drawn through a colorimeter cuvette which continuously measures the
concentration of dye, using the principle of absorption photometry

                                                                                                                                           12

                                                                                                                                        03-09-2025

                                                    Ref.: Handbook of Biomedical Instrumentation-R.S. Khandpur

THERMAL DILUTION METHOD
 A thermal indicator of known volume introduced into either the right or left
 atrium will produce a resultant temperature change in the pulmonary artery or
 in the aorta respectively, the integral of which is inversely proportional to the
 cardiac output.

 Practical Difficulty
 The technique of cannulation of the internal jugular vein and the difficulty of floating
 small catheters into the pulmonary artery prevented a rapid clinical acceptance of
 the technique.

THERMAL DILUTION METHOD
 Swan Ganz Triple Lumen Baloon Catheter

                                                                                                                                               13

                                                                                                                                03-09-2025

THERMAL DILUTION METHOD
 Swan Ganz Triple Lumen Baloon Catheter 1.First lumen measure pressure during
                                        catheter insertion, and pressure in pulmonary
                                        artery.
                                        2. Second lumen measures pressure in Right
                                        Atrium and also to inject cold injectate
                                        3. A third lumen is used to inflate the balloon.
                                        4. The wires connecting the thermistor are
                                        contained in a fourth lumen. Thermistor floats
                                        in Pulmonary Artery

THERMAL DILUTION METHOD
 Computation of Cardiac Output

                                                                                                                                       14

                                                                                                                                         03-09-2025

THERMAL DILUTION METHOD
 Computation of Cardiac Output
A solution of 5% Dextrose in water at room temperature is injected as a thermal indicator
into the right atrium.
It mixes in the right ventricle, and is detected in the pulmonary artery by means of a
thermistor mounted at the tip of a miniature catheter probe.
The injectate temperature is also sensed by a thermistor and the temperature difference
between the injectate and the blood circulating in the pulmonary artery is measured.
The reduction in temperature in the pulmonary artery (due to the passage of the Dextrose) is
integrated with respect to time and the blood flow in the pulmonary artery is then computed
electronically by an analog computer which also applies correction factors.
A meter provides a direct reading of cardiac output after being muted until integration is
complete so as to avoid spurious indications during a determination.

                                                                                                                                                15