1

                             Biomedical Instrumentation-II

                                    Chapter 3: Patient Monitoring System

1.1 Introduction to patient monitors

A medical monitor or physiological monitor or display, is an electronic medical devicethat measures a
patient's vital signs and displays the data so obtained, which may or may not be transmitted on a monitoring
network. Physiological data are displayed continuously on a CRT or LCD screen as data channels along the
time axis, They may be accompanied by numerical readouts of computed parameters on the original data, such
as maximum, minimum and average values, pulse and respiratory frequencies, and so on.

In critical care units of hospitals, bedside units allow continuous monitoring of a patient, with medical staff being
continuously informed of the changes in general condition of a patient. Some monitors can even warn of
pending fatal cardiac conditions before visible signs are noticeable to clinical staff, such as atrial
fibrillation or premature ventricular contraction (PVC).

1.1.1 Analog Monitoring

Old analog patient monitors were based on oscilloscopes, and had one channel only, usually reserved for
electrocardiographic monitoring (ECG). So, medical monitors tended to be highly specialized. One monitor
would track a patient's blood pressure, while another would measure pulse oximetry, another the ECG. Later
analog       models    had   a   second   or   third   channel   displayed   in   the    same    screen,   usually   to
monitor respiration movements and blood pressure. These machines were widely used and saved many lives,
but they had several restrictions, including sensitivy to electrical interference, base level fluctuations, and
absence of numeric readouts and alarms. In addition, although wireless monitoring telemetry was in principle
possible (the technology was developed by NASA in the late 1950s for manned spaceflight, it was expensive
and cumbersome.

1.1.2 Digital Monitoring

With the development of digital signal processing (DSP) technology, however, medical monitors evolved
enormously, and all current models are digital, which also has the advantages of miniaturization and portability.
Today the trend is toward multiparameter monitors that can track many different vital signs at once. The
parameters (or measurements) now consist of pulse oximetry (measurement of the saturated percentage
of oxygen in the blood, referred to as SpO2, and measured by an infrared finger cuff), ECG (electrocardiograph
of the QRS waves of the heart with or without an accompanying external heart pacemaker), blood
pressure (either invasively through an inserted blood pressure transducer assembly, or non-invasively with an
inflatable     blood     pressure    cuff),    and body     temperature through         an adhesive    pad containing
athermoelectric transducer. In some situations, other parameters can be measured and displayed, such
as cardiac output (via an invasive Swan-Ganz catheter), capnography (CO2 measurements, referred to
as EtCO2 or end-tidal carbon dioxide concentration), respiration (through a thoracic transducer belt, an ECG
channel or via EtCO2, when it is called AWRR or airway respiratory rate), etc.

                                                                              2

     A typical patient monitoring system

Front panel of L&T’s Planet 50 patient monitors

                                                                                                                      3

Besides the tracings of physiological parameters along time (X axis), digital medical monitors have
automated numeric readouts of the peak and/or average parameters displayed on the screen, and
high/low alarm levels can be set, which alert the staff when some parameter exceeds of falls the level limits,
using audible signals.

Several models of multiparameter monitors are networkable, i.e., they can send their output to a central ICU
monitoring station, where a single staff member can observe and respond to several bedside monitors
simultaneously. Ambulatory telemetry can also be achieved by portable, battery-operated models which are
carried by the patient and which transmit their data via a wireless data connection.

1.2 Measurement of heart rate

Heart rate is the number of heartbeats per unit of time, typically expressed as beats per minute (bpm). Heart
rate can vary as the body's need to absorb oxygen and excrete carbon dioxide changes, such as
during exercise or sleep.

The measurement of heart rate is used by medical professionals to assist in the diagnosis and tracking of
medical conditions. It is also used by individuals, such as athletes, who are interested in monitoring their heart
rate to gain maximum efficiency from their training. The R wave to R wave interval (RR interval) is the inverse of
the heart rate.

Heart rate is measured by finding the pulse of the body. This pulse rate can be measured at any point on the
body where the artery's pulsation is transmitted to the surface by pressuring it with the index and middle fingers;
often it is compressed against an underlying structure like bone. The thumb should not be used for measuring
another person's heart rate, as its strong pulse may interfere with discriminating the site of pulsation.

Possible points for measuring the heart rate are:

    1. The ventral aspect of the wrist on the side of the thumb (radial artery).
    2. The ulnar artery.
    3. The neck (carotid artery).
    4. The inside of the elbow, or under the biceps muscle (branchial artery).
    5. The groin (femoral artery).
    6. Behind the medial malleolus on the feet (posterior tibial artery).
    7. Middle of dorsum of the foot (dorsalis pedis).
    8. Behind the knee (popliteal artery).
    9. Over the abdomen (abdominal aorta).
    10. The chest (apex of heart), which can be felt with one's hand or fingers. However, it is possible
         to auscultate the heart using a stethoscope.
    11. The temple (Superficial Temporal Artery)

                                                                                                                     4

    12. The lateral edge of the Mandible Facial artery.

A more precise method of determining pulse involves the use of an electrocardiograph, or EKG (also
abbreviated EKG). Continuous electrocardiograph monitoring of the heart is routinely done in many clinical
settings, especially in critical care medicine. Commercial heart rate monitors are also available, consisting of a
chest strap with electrodes. The signal is transmitted to a wrist receiver for display. Heart rate monitors allow
accurate measurements to be taken continuously and can be used during exercise when manual measurement
would be difficult or impossible (such as when the hands are being used).

1.2.1 Average Heart Rate meters

1.2.2 Instantaneous Heart Rate meters

                                                                                        5

1.2.3 Block diagram of Instantaneous heart rate meter

1.3 Measurement of Pulse Rate

                                                                    6

1.3.1 Electrical Impedance method

1.3.2 Strain gauge method

1.3.3 Photoelectric method

                                                                                              7

1.3.4 Chamber Plythysmography

1.3.4.1 Block diagram for processing plythysmography signal

                                                                                                                   8

1.4 Blood Pressure

Blood pressure is a measurement of the force applied to the walls of the arteries as the heart pumps blood
through the body. The force and amount of blood pumped, and the size and flexibility of the arteries determine
the pressure. Unless indicated otherwise, blood pressure is understood to mean arterial blood pressure, i.e. the
pressure in the large arteries, such as the brachial artery (in the arm). The pressure of the blood in other
vessels is lower than the arterial pressure. It is measured in mmHg (millimeters of mercury).

1.4.1 SYSTOLIC PRESSURE: Systolic pressure is the force of blood in the arteries as the heart beats. It is
measured in mmHg.

1.4.2 DIASTOLIC PRESSURE: The pressure exerted on the walls of the arteries when the Heart is in the
relaxation phase (diastole). It is measured in mmHg.

Blood pressure is always given as these two numbers, the systolic and diastolic pressures. Both are important.
Usually they are written one above or before the other, such as 120/80-mmHg .The top number is the systolic
and the bottom the diastolic. When the two measurements are written down, the systolic pressure is the first or
top number, and the diastolic pressure is the second or bottom number (for example, 120/80). If your blood
pressure       is       120/80,      you       say        that     it      is       "120       over        80."

Blood pressure changes during the day. It is lowest as you sleep and rises when you get up. It also can rise
when you are excited, nervous, or active. Blood pressure is continually changing depending on activity,
temperature, diet, emotional state, posture, physical state, and medication use.

Hypertension, commonly referred to as "high blood pressure" is a medical condition in which the blood
pressure is chronically elevated. It has four stages:

?   Mild stage 1= 140/90 –160/100 mmHg, only lifestyle change is required.
?   Moderate stage 2 = 160/100-180/110 mmHg, requires treatment.
?   Severe stage 3= 180/110-210/120 mmHg, increased risk of cardiovascular disease kidney problems
?   Very severe stage 4=210/120 and above mm Hg, stroke, heart attack may lead to death

                                                                                                                    9

Hypotension is pressure that is so low that it causes symptoms or signs due to the low flow of blood through
the arteries and veins. When the flow of blood is too low to deliver enough oxygen and nutrients to vital organs
such as the brain, heart, and kidney, the organs do not function normally and may be permanently damaged. In
range of 90/60 to 50/35 patient may feel tired, dizzy and may faint. When BP is less than the above-mentioned
range, patient may go into coma or die.

                                             Blood Pressure chart

1.4.3 BLOOD PRESSURE MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUES

Blood pressure can be measured invasively, (by penetrating the skin and measuring inside the blood vessels)
which is restricted to a hospital setting or non-invasively. Invasively BP is measured with the help of a cannula
needle in artery. Non-invasively BP is measured in two ways i.e. by Auscultatory and Oscillometric method.

                                                                                                                   10

In non-invasive methods we use cuff. The cuff consists of a fabric or synthetic sleeve enclosing a bladder.
Disposable cuffs, especially those for newborn children (neonates) are often manufactured of welded synthetic
material with integrated bladder. Since the cuff pressure directly influences the blood flow through the arteria
brachialis or other arteries - tissue, muscles and bones may be considered as almost incompressible - the ratio
of upper arm circumference to cuff width is of decisive importance to the accuracy.

1.4.3.1 Direct measurement techniques

1.4.3.2 Extravascular Sensors

                                                                                             11

1.4.3.3 Intravascular Sensors

1.4.3.4 Fiber optic sensors for blood pressure measurement

1.4.4 Blood pressure Waveform distortion

                                                                                                                      12

1.4.5 NON-INVASIVE BLOOD PRESSURE (NIBP) MEASUREMENT
Non-invasively blood pressure can be measured by two ways i.e. using ascultatory method or oscillometric
method.

Principle of Non-invasive (Indirect) Blood Pressure Monitoring:

Arterial blood pressure is created by pulsatile blood flow during the ejection phase of the cardiac cycle. Left
ventricular ejection initiates a pressure wave that precedes the actual flow of arterial blood, creating the pulses
we palpate.

1.4.5.1 AUSCULTATORY METHOD

Auscultation means the act of listening, either directly or through a stethoscope or other instrument, to sounds
within the body as a method of diagnosis, which is the main principle of this method.

                                                                                                                       13

The cuff is wrapped around the patient’s upper arm at a point about midway between the elbow and shoulder.
The stethoscope is placed over an artery distal (i.e. downstream) to the cuff. This placement is preferred
because the brachial artery comes close to the surface near the antecubital space (i.e. inside elbow) and so is
easily accessible. The cuff is inflated so that pressure inside the inflated bladder is increased to a point greater
than the anticipated systolic pressure. This pressure compresses the artery against the underlying bone,
causing an occlusion that shuts off the flow of blood.

The operator then slowly releases the pressure in the cuff and then listens to the sound in the stethoscope.
Traditionally, the sounds have been classified as 5 phases:

Phase I: appearance of clear tapping sounds corresponding to the appearance of a palpable pulse;

Phase II: sounds become softer and longer;

Phase III: sounds become crisper and louder;

Phase IV: sounds become muffled and softer; and

Phase V: sounds disappear completely.

The fifth phase is thus recorded as the last audible sound.

                Auscultatory method: Showing sound levels and their corresponding BP values.

The sounds are thought to originate from a combination of turbulent blood flow and oscillations of the arterial
wall. There is agreement that the onset of phase I corresponds to systolic pressure but tends to underestimate
the systolic pressure recorded by direct intra-arterial measurement. The disappearance of sounds (phase V)
corresponds to diastolic pressure but tends to occur before diastolic pressure determined by direct intra-arterial
measurement. No clinical significance has been attached to phases II and III.

                                                                                                                          14

1.4.5.2 OSCILLOMETRIC METHOD

The auscultatory method has been the mainstay of clinical blood pressure measurement for as long as blood
pressure has been measured but is gradually being supplanted by oscillometric method.

The equipment is functionally similar to that of the auscultatory method, but with an electronic pressure sensor
(transducer) fitted in to detect blood flow, instead of using the stethoscope and the expert's ear. The pressure
sensor is a calibrated electronic device with a numerical readout of blood pressure.

The cuff is fitted on the upper arm. The cuff is inflated to a pressure initially in excess of the systolic blood
pressure, and then reduces to below diastolic pressure over a period of about 30 seconds. When blood flow is
nil (cuff pressure exceeding systolic pressure) or unimpeded (cuff pressure below diastolic pressure), cuff
pressure will be essentially constant. It is essential that the cuff size is correct: undersized cuffs may yield
too high a pressure, whereas oversized cuffs yield too low a pressure. When blood flow is present, but
restricted, the cuff pressure, which is monitored by the pressure sensor, will vary periodically in synchrony with
the cyclic expansion and contraction of the brachial artery, i.e., it will oscillate. Following is the pressure graph
i.e. pressure in the cuff during measurement.

Initially the cuff is inflated and we get a linearly increasing graph i.e. the cuff inflation part in the graph. During
this time oscillations in the cuff are of very small amplitude. Then slowly cuff pressure is decreased in intervals
(step region of graph). While decreasing the pressure in the cuff, there is an interval when the oscillation
reaches to maximum and then again starts decreasing. The interval where maximum amplitude is seen is when
arterial pressure equals the cuff pressure. This pressure is known as Mean Arterial Pressure (MAP). This value
is used to compute the values of systolic and diastolic pressure with the help of algorithms.

                                                                   15

1.5 Respiration rate measurement

1.5.1 Displacement method

1.5.2 Thermistor method

1.5.3 Impedance Pneumogram

                                                                        16

1.5.4 Apnoea Detectors

1.5.5 Block Diagram of apnoea monitor

                                                               17

1.6 Bedside Patient Monitors

                                                                           18

Block diagram of bedside patient monitor

                                                                                                                    19

1.7 Central Monitoring System/ Central Nurse’s Station

Central Nursing Station is a state of the art real-time scalable multiple bed monitoring workstation. It provides
scalable application framework to acquire, store and review vital parameters from bed side patient monitors.
Scalability includes beds, monitors, parameters, display elements, storage and reports.

An intensive care unit central nurse’s station is shown in Figure below. Multiconnector cable connects the
output form the four subject- monitoring sites located beside each intensive care bed to the central nurse’s
station. Each subject’s ECG is continuously displayed via a four channel CRT display. And also these signals
are being recorded continuously on a memory loop tape recorder. This tape recorder contains the previous one-

                                                                                                                      20

                                  Block Diagram of Central Nurse’s Station

minute ECG history for each subject by recording the ECG on a tape loop “one minute” in length. Some central
stations duplicate physiological indicators for relative blood pressure, respiratory activity and body temperature.
These indicators can be manually switched between the four beds or the switching may be activated by the
alarm system with the monitors being automatically switched to the bed providing the alarm signal. When an
alarm is received at the central nurse’s station, it may also be used to connect the appropriate ECG signal to a
scan converter and ECG chart recorder and to start the chart recorder. In this way, a permanent record is
achieved on the chart recorder beginning one minute prior to the alarm being sounded and information is
displayed on the scan converter for transmission via the hospital closed circuit TV system to other medical
personnel involved. The scan converter and closed-circuit TV system may also incorporate alphanumeric input
to allow alphanumeric data relating to the intensive care subject to be displayed on television receivers located
throughout the hospital.